Let's talk about amazing formulas to assess financials We'll talk about four categories of formulas
.
The first will be profit How profitable is a company for every $1 in stuff they sell.
The second category is competition or comps.
How is the company doing or valued versus the competition.
The third category is what about time.
How long does it take a company to turn stuff that they create into cash.
And the last section is debt OK.
And how do we know if a company has way too much debt.
All right.
Let's talk about profitability.
How profitable is a company for every $1 in stuff they sell.
So How profitable is the company for every dollar they sell of inventory before expenses.
Right.
That's the cost of goods sold divided by revenue and that's also referred to as gross margin.
Next up how profitable is a company for every dollar they sell of inventory.
Aftermost expenses that's called it's divided by revenue or operating margin.
Okay Ibidem divided by revenue equals operating margin.
And you might ask yourself why I don't understand Chris why don't we just look at at earnings.
We have to look at the well the recent we look at it is because if we compare and contrast companies
in different countries that have different tax rates and different interest rates etc. We don't compare
them.
So for example you got Rolex in Switzerland You've got was there Cartier in France and you've got Mickey
Mouse in the United States.
You can compare all three of them using either the revenue.
Cool.
So next up we've got How profitable is a company for every dollar they sell their mentor.
After all expenses.
And that is net income divided by revenue net profit margin.
Right.
Read the bottom of the income statement and then next up we've got How profitable is a company for every
dollar they have of assets.
Well that's net income divided by assets which is referred to as return on assets.
And similarly How profitable is a company for every dollar they have of equity that is net income over
equity which is called return on equity.
Now which one of these formulas uses the income statement and which formulas use the balance sheet.
Okay.
Well income statement is most of them but the bottom 2 is important because this formula net income
assets and net income to equity uses both the income statement and the balance sheet to assess profitability
.
Pretty cool.
All right.
Let's move on to debt.
How do we know if a company has way too much debt.
Does the company have more debt than assets.
That's total liabilities divided by total assets and that's debt to assets and banks don't want that
number to be greater than one.
Right.
Otherwise they'll say oh you have too much debt.
I'm not going to lend to you anymore.
Also does the company have more debt than equity.
That's a pretty important one.
That's total liabilities to out of my total equity debt to equity.
And the last one is can a company pay the interest on its debt.
This was crucial.
This is called the interest coverage ratio that divided by interest and you want to be many many times
bigger than interest.
Otherwise banks get really worried that you can't pay the interest on your debt.
These formulas use the balance sheet and the income statement.
OK.
Let's move on to what about time.
How long does it take a company to turn stuff they sell into cash.
All right.
So how many days of inventory is a company have on hand inventory divided by the Coskata old times 365
equals inventory days on hand or doh.
I couldn't resist.
And basically this is how it works.
It costs 100 bucks make a watch.
We saw a thousand this year therefore our costs the good soul was $100000 this year.
Right.
That's just 100 bucks times a thousand.
All right.
At the end of the year we have 10 in inventory 10 items a hundred equals 1000.
OK.
Stay with me here.
Costco sold the game 100 grand for the year.
Inventory's a thousand bucks at the end of the year.
OK.
We had 10 left right.
The amatory times under bucks each.
All right.
Creative.
So inventory divided by the cascode sold times 365 equals 3.6 five days of inventory days on hand.
Let's talk about comps.
How is the company doing or valued versus the competition.
And it's tough to compare companies in different countries on all metrics and we talked about this before
.
You can't just look at bottom line profitability you kind of have to look at it because different countries
have different tax rates interest rates but also from an investing perspective.
Some companies trade at a premium and some come in some countries for certain reasons.
Right and so for example for years as a trade at a huge premium to Oracle.
Why.
Because portfolio managers in Germany or in Europe didn't have as many tech or software companies to
choose from to invest in.
A while back and therefore a lot of them piled in the S&P and S&P trade at a premium to Oracle and we
saw some Cognos too years ago in Canada.
Cognos is a or was a business intelligence software company that was based in Ottawa and then IBM bought
them.
But it used to trade at a premium to its Comsat times.
And so SJP based in Germany traded at a premium to Oracle which is based in the US right.
But it also did because Sep was growing a little bit faster.
Just to be fair.
All right.
Price to earnings.
This is the same thing as market cap to net income.
Close enough right.
I put a little footnote down there we know that market cap equal shares time in Cyprus right another
comps when we look at for comparing companies is Peg price earnings to growth and growth is EPS growth
.
We talked about this then there's price to revenue and price price equals market cap right and EDT but
we talked about this as well.
EV equals marketing cap plus debt minus cash and short term investments.
And then EV to sales.
Same thing except with sales the same thing as revenue.
You know that and then we look at price to cash flow and free cash flow I'm sorry it's at the bottom
of our cash flow statement.
I don't want to call it free cash flow.
I mean it's a cash really free.
I don't get it.
All right.
And then they got price to book which we cover quickly.
So book equals book value which is basically assets and liabilities that they're on their way to tangible
assets.
But for simplicity let's just assume that it's just assets and liabilities.
Now don't forget to account for growth.
OK a lot of times companies trade at premies other companies because they're growing faster in the I
guess the best metric to use for this is price earnings to growth.
But when you're looking at price to revenue or but are different metrics.
Always try to see if the growth rate of one company is higher than the other.
And if it is it usually trades at a premium multiple